![Foreword](./img/00_header.png)

# Foreword

What is observability? It seems like this should be a settled question after
over five years of sustained hype, millions of dollars of marketing, dozens of
companies of various sizes selling observability products, and an expansive
landscape of open source software in the field.

While academic definitions exist borrowing from safety studies, control theory,
cognitive systems engineering, and more, there's still an identifiable gap
between 'observability-as-defined' and 'observability-as-practiced'. This has
been exacerbated by the voluminous marketing budgets of both incumbent and
insurgent developer tooling companies, presenting a challenge -- if
observability feels so static as we preach it, why does it feel so unattainable
in practice?

This report seeks to understand and answer that question, as well as several
more. In lieu of being dictated, we're trying to find the answer to it together.
To that end, you can think of what you're about to read as an 'open access'
white paper. Our goal is to present an opinion on what observability --
specifically, observability for cloud-native systems -- is, and where it should
go. Rather than accept the status quo definitions, we would like to build
something new, and build it in a collaborative way.

Much of this report assumes some familiarity with the basics of cloud-native
software and systems, although we try to keep it rather light. We're expressing
a vision, not a blueprint, and visions aren't that useful if you can't interpret
them. Important concepts are introduced and explained in-line where possible,
although please refer to the [glossary](./000%20-%20glossary.md) if there's
something you don't understand.

Finally, this project isn't meant to just be a stand-alone report to be written
and then rot. This is meant to be a collaborative exercise, created and iterated
on in public. If you find something you disagree with, [open an
issue](https://github.com/lightstep/cloud-native-observability/issues/new) and
let's discuss it. Do you have a personal story that aligns with something we're
talking about? Let us know, add an [appendix](./001%20-%20appendices.md). We
gladly welcome case studies and anecdotes about the success and failures of
current observability practice.

I hope this report acts not only as an impetus and inspiration to the entire
observability community, but that the way in which we build it can act as a
model as well. Let's figure out where we want to go, then go out and build it.
Please, contribute to this journey, and let's go together.

@austinlparker 3/25/22
